---
published: false
topic:
subtitle: An addition to my prior piece titled "Where Is My Mind&#63;"
date: 2024-07-27
tags: islam anthropology
---
# Ādam
For the pronunciations of non-English symbols in this article, see: [[Transliteration|Transliteration Guide]].



Having investigated the mundanity associated with contemporary life, I turn towards the one human entirely free from this problem: Ādam &#xFD47;.


As the first man created by Allāh &#xFD4E;, Ādam &#xFD47; was the first among us to experience life and that which accompanies it: joy, rage, terror, love, and so on. But boredom would have been foreign to him. In a world where all is novel, and mundanity is dispelled by a single step into the uncharted horizon, ennui is a concept hardly conceivable. From naught, he burgeoned into the world without a forebegotten notion of existence apart from his own. His experience of the world was not a blur, muddied by the comparative lens through which we view our lives, but a raw reaction to yet unseen stimuli. For how long was his nascent mind encoding thought upon thought, percept upon percept?

{% comment %}

In such a dopaminergic environment,
Our Prophet Ādam slept under the same stars as we do, and he too must have gazed at them in awe.

He must have rubbed his hands together when he was cold, and retreated to the shade for respite from the sun, come summer.

And when the sun sank into the horizon each night, perhaps he took a moment to grasp the beauty of the Creation.

It is his unacknowledged legacy supporting all that we have accomplished.
Human language, knowledge, and culture, though since evolved, has all been inherited from him. No matter how much time separates us from him, we are no more than his children, doing as he taught us to do all those years ago. I find it quite comforting that we are so connected to him without even realizing it. 

{% endcomment %}

صلى الله على ابينا آدم أول من عبد الله منا
May Allāh's blessings be upon our father Ādam, the first among us to worship his Lord.



[//begin]: # "Autogenerated link references for markdown compatibility"
[Transliteration|Transliteration Guide]: ../_notes/Transliteration "Transliteration"
[//end]: # "Autogenerated link references"